template: blog/entry.template
title: What?

---

Jesus.

This Ahmadinejad business is embarrassing. We manage to make ourselves look like
collective idiots by a mediocre and marginally insane twit.

Somebody just pointed out that Iran is waging an effective propaganda feat vis a
vis Chinese and Russian audiences and the dumbass "journalist," the fire to the
feet of our government, looks befuddled asking "How would he do that?" -- as if
nothing the man says makes any sense at all.

I don't know how many "journalists" I've seen hang this guy and besmirch
everything he might say in advance. Some kid is interviewed after the speech at
Columbia, "I thought the chancellor did a good job of undermining him from the
start.

This is a trainwreck unfolding here. Groupthink on acid.

The guy is rambling and ineffective, caught up in some opinions which offend
many people. And yet, nobody figures it's incumbent upon them to sort out the
bullshit (insofar as it is bullshit) from the possibility he may have a point on
several matters.

But nooooo. Even the "journalists" routinely echo question-begging assumptions
about his being "a terrorist" and a "sponsor of terrorism". Scott Pelley the
other day just ooozed emotionalistic pus when he questioned Ahmandinejad over
ground zero, as if Iran had attacked us. Nevermind that in Iran we saw an
outpouring of sympathy and pro-American expression right after 9/11. Here's a
nation with no history of aggression, being framed as the worst threat on Earth
by a nation with not only a history, a near history! of hyper-aggression, but
who has illegally invaded Iraq (if Nuremburg Principles and the UN Charter are
to be recognized) bloviating about Iran while poised to attack.

Some inconceivably stupid bag of air is on MSNBC (she's the "journalist")
framing Ahmandinejad almost in total sync with Administration propaganda. It's
unreal.

She's wondering how Ahmandinejad could have any sway with Russia and China! So
full of shit she can't even see straight, can't even see how Chinese or Russian
leaders might view the US nowadays. It doesn't take a doctorate in International
Studies! It takes two minutes reading foreign newspapers. You know, they exist.

I didn't catch it all. I did catch the part where he said homosexuality doesn't
exist in Iran. Sure does sound stupid, eh? But, matter of fact, the view could
be defended given that an Islamic religious worldview might deny any
homosexuality exists as such, i.e. as some actual/real collection of discrete
homosexual units. Hate the sin, love the sinner; it's easier for us to look down
our nose with our vaunted 21st Century revealed wisdom at a crude little man.
But nooooo, he is "a holocaust denier"... even though he denied any denial of
the holocaust. But noooo, he's said "Israel should be wiped from the map"...
when it's clear upon patient listening that he distinguishes between Zionism and
Israel proper, even in the speech likening Zionism to Apartheid (which has been
wiped off the map while leaving the RSA intact -- and which was the other
"regime" modern Iran had specifically refused diplomatic contact with, and I
don't think anyone would fault them on that one). We just cannot listen to this
man.... why, we must condemn and deplore Columbia for giving him the stage
wherein legitimacy might be conferred! He can't say anything we want to
hear...why look at the funny things he has said about x, y and z.

But aside from the fact he may be a crude, unsophisticated, petty man -- even a
delusional buffoon -- it could still pay to try and actually listen. Democracy
in Iran was overthrown by the US in '53. We shot down one of their civilian
airliners, bodies floating in the Persian Gulf. We supported Saddam Hussein in
aggressive war against Iran in the '80s, a war that employed chemical weapons.
If Iran wasn't trying to impress other nations like China and Russia, they might
have demanded an apology for such things before he would speak at Columbia!

Why we're in a hyper-emotionalized oblivion here, the (sniff) sanctity of
beloved Ground Zero... the wonderous intent of our noble war for freedom,
regardless of horror upon horror. We've brutalized Iran and look down our nose
at them as though they are warmongers. They can't have nukes under any
circumstances, even though the looming immediacy of an American attack on Iran
would appear to justify the desire... the need as like nothing else!

And then Pat Buchanan comes on and speaks contrary to the regnant, gaseous
Groupthink! Pat fucking Buchanan! And up against his points the "journalist"
says: "If you were running for President again you would not be making this
argument... politically speaking, you would not be making this argument." Fox
and MSNBC are resonating to the same ludicrous chord; did Condi hand out the
talking points in person?

Christ, we're all going to hell. Pat Buchannan speaks the truth and Cadillac
Trucks are being sold to the tune of Led Zeppelin. It's insane. We'll be at war
with Iran soon, and the kids will still refrain from protest, heads plugged into
iPods... and all of us with our heads up our ass.

([shamelessly adapted][1])

[1]: http://episteme.arstechnica.com/eve/forums/a/tpc/f/28609695/m/107007457831
