A few months after I started working, I realized I was stuck in something
serious. Around me were people who had been doing this, walking into this
building in the morning and leaving it at night, for years, and would continue
to do it for the foreseeable future. Even with city turnover as it is, there are
people here for whom work is more native than home.

This sort of realization affects you in different ways. One day you wake up and
maybe the only thing on your mind is doing your best! and having a good time of
showing off how legit you are. A week later it might be that all you can think
about is retiring to an island somewhere, to whittle or breathe the air or
whatever. But for me, consistently, I look at the free food we have, and I look
at the asses of the people who had clearly been here awhile, and I put two and
two together and I get "angioplasty at 35".

So, the gym is the answer. And everyone does it! Man, what a social enterprise.
At some level, it's a well-lit bar that you briefly get naked in. There's flat-
screens and hipsters, gay folk and an unspoken, sort of universal code of law.
You don't slam the weights down, for example. You give the bench-presser
deference over the cardio guy. You wipe your sweat off the machine! You probably
don't talk to someone in the middle of a set. Anyone who's spent time pumping
the irons can tell you these things.

But I encountered something in this place that was altogether new to me--the
nomadic personal trainer, for the first time in his native environment. As best
as I can deduce, they work like this: the gym will hire a bunch of these guys,
so that at any given time there will be 3 or 4 or 6 of them standing around.
They probably get some waiter-level wage from the establishment, but to make
rent they've gotta get out on the floor and hustle. How do you drum up business
in this situation? It's a freaking art, and it's amazing to watch.

First, they have to make contact with you. There you are, mildly sweaty and
observing the Gym Code by keeping roughly to yourself, just finishing a set on
the butterfly or pulldown or whatever. There's the window of opportunity! The
trainer swoops in, sits on the machine next to you.

"Yeah man," he'll start, I just got done working that one. The code has been
broken, if ever so slightly! "Yeah, I gotta tell you though, I don't really like
it that much." What? Here's where it starts.

The guy has to work two completely different angles, without scaring you off. He
has to appear friendly, encouraging and helpful; he has to make you comfortable
and willing to tell him about "what're you targeting today?" or if "you're gonna
need a spot on the benchpress next" or whatever. So he's gotta butter you up a
little bit. But at the same time, he has to let you know just how badly you need
his help, by telling you how terrible you are at working out on your own!

So that machine you're on? He doesn't like it very much--in fact, it kind of
sucks. But he'd be happy to show you a better exercise you could try, if you
were interested in hiring him for an introductory half-hour session. And you
look like you're ready for it, look like you've got a lot of potential, man, but
your form could use a little work right here, and was that you he saw over at
the freeweights a little while ago? He wasn't going to say anything, but you
were way off on those curls.

It's got to be a script that they use. I've heard it three times from three
different people. And I guess it works! I mean, not on me. My form sucks, I'm
not working to my potential... in fact, I'm basically a lazy bastard and am
completely wasting the money I spend on the membership. I go three times a week,
halfass a workout on the machines and weights, run my 2 or 3 miles, and get out
of there hoping I've delayed the triple bypass by another month or two. But I
definitely get a kick out of the pitch.
